The Science Fiction Radio Show A commentary on science fiction today Presented
by the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
This is David Crews Daryl Lane And David Carson.
On this program we will be talking with author Larry Niven. Niven first appeared
in print in 1964. And by 1976 he had won the Hugo Award five times. He has written
a set of stories set in what he calls Known Space, which are a future history or
a series of stories with a common background. He has also written several novels
and stories not related to the Known Space series. Aside from science fiction
Niven has written a fantasy called The Magic Goes Away and co-authored with
Jerry Pournelle a science fiction rendering of Dante's Inferno Entitled
appropriately enough, Inferno. Other collaborations with Jerry Pournelle include A
Mote in God's Eye And the bestseller, Lucifer's Hammer. For my first question to
you Mr. Niven I'd like to ask if you classify yourself as a hard science fiction
writer in the tradition of Hal Clement. If you've got to classify me, that's
where I fit, yes I would, uh... I suppose all writers resist classification as
best they can I do other things too. Fantasy.
Considerable fantasy. A great deal more hard science fiction. Not much in the way
of soft science fiction Uh... Articles, speeches I'm the guy who did a... Uh...
Study of the medical problems of breeding Kryptonians Called Man of Steal,
Woman of Kleenex. And I just published the only venture I've ever made into
economics: A method which would also solve the problem of nuclear waste disposal.
The idea is to turn the nuclear waste into coins. A healthy economy is one in
which the money circulates fast. You mentioned that you had not written much in
the area of soft science fiction. Do you think the new wave is past? That fans
and writers are turning back to strongly science-oriented stories? Yes, I do
However, the new wave was very good to me When I was first getting started, I
was the only new hard science fiction writer. The new wave is a very persuasive
thing. Uh... And very easy to use to justify bad stories. I think that's what
killed it. Not... Not that, uh... Not that increased characterization And
experiments with, uh... Typography and story format are a bad thing in
themselves, but it's so easy to use New wave to justify a bad story. It was bound
to collapse. How did you begin writing science fiction? Were you always a science
fiction reader? A fan? Yes. And presently I found I was making up I was
daydreaming stories that seemed worth writing. Did you tell the stories to others
before you gained enough confidence to write them down? Yes I've been a
storyteller all my life. You have a large and involved fan following. Do you ever
write specifically for them? Or do you write only what you want to? I mostly
write for myself, for an imaginary reader who resembles me a great deal. Only he
needs things explained to him. Beyond that, uh... I sell it where I can and pick
up readers where I can. Let's turn to your Known Space series for a moment. How
did you get started writing a future history? Well, there had been future
histories around. Uh, Poul Anderson's and, uh, Robert Heinlein And I tell you I
guess we each evolve the, uh, idea somewhat independently. And the idea is that
if you carved out a consistent workable future, it seems a shame to waste it on
one story. You put in the background because you want the, uh... You want the,
uh... Background of a story to seem bigger than it is. So there are things that
are simply unexplained.
And if you think of more to say on a given subject, why, you go with it. And if you
think of a story that fits into the background of a previous story, it allows you
to elaborate on that background. Sometimes you fall in love with the background
And presently you've got a bunch of stories that link. In the afterword of
Ringworld Engineers, you said that your Known Space series was completed. Is that
still true? And if so, why? I've given up saying that the, uh... That the Known
Space series is dead. There's just no point in it. I've written five books worth
of Known Space stories since I said that. And besides that, I have no doubt that
I'll come up with stories set in the, in Gildly Arms time. I like writing
science fiction detective stories. It just, it's just hard work I do not have a
detective story in my head. It'll have to emerge. But that's the beginning of
Known Space. And I'll continue to work with it where it looks like fun. You have,
as you mentioned, written science fiction detective stories. And you've
experimented with humor in science fiction. Is there any subject area that you
think can't be handled well in the science fiction genre? No, I can't think of
any I guess I go along with the idea that there are these interlocked circles To
represent various areas of fiction And they all swim in the sea of fantasy.
Science fiction probably includes the entire portion of fantasy that is possible
And, uh, mainstream would be somewhere in there. These novels would be somewhere
in that. There would be no subject you could treat in English that couldn't be
treated in a science fiction format. Except, uh, fantasy and that would be
treated in a fantasy format. Probably your best known work in the Known Space
series is Ringworld. Can you tell us how that concept came about? Oh, I ran
across the concept Dyson sphere. Dyson, the mathematician, came up with the
concept Dyson shell. And he was misunderstood to some extent. So, presently I ran
across an article about Dyson spheres. Picture that as a golf ball 93 million
miles in radius with a sun at the center and gravity generators all around the
outside. So you would live on the inside, terraform it with, uh, oceans and soil
and air. I ran across that and I didn't like it I thought it could be improved.
And I wound up with the Ringworld Freeman Dyson, in commenting on your
adaptation of his idea said that a great number of small Ringworlds would be
better than the large one that you had. I believe I gave an acceptable answer to
that in, uh, the Ringworld Engineers, but in general, he'd be right. It's just that
the, uh, Ringworld engineers in particular are people who like dependable
weapons of huge size. Many of your fans pointed out a number of mistakes and made
many elaborations on the concept of the Ringworld. Can you tell us what some of
them were and how they were corrected or worked into the sequel? For instance I
suspected the Ringworld was unstable and I suspected you'd need attitude jets. I
was sure that, uh, the Ringworld was spinning fast enough to permit Blizzard
Ramjets to be used as attitude jets, which means you don't have a fuel problem at
all. You're burning the solar wind. But, uh, rapidly some MIT people demonstrated
that the Ringworld was unstable and they were chanting it in the halls at, uh,
at the next Worldcon. The Ringworld is unstable. The Ringworld is unstable. Uh, it
still took about seven years for anyone to figure out the exact numbers for the
instability. And they are horrifying. The Ringworld, uh, a major solar flare would
have the Ringworld grinding against its own Sun in five years. Hmm, well, I worked
it into the plot. That was one, uh, elaboration or error, another just can't be
correct. It seems that there's too much twilight with the shadow squares set up
the way I have them set up. You get too much of neither day nor night but
twilight. Uh, half the sun's showing. Part of the sun's showing. The shadow squares
ought to be set up with about five big shadow squares moving
in a retrograde world. That way you get day and night setting much faster When
it, when it sets. Terminator line moves like a bat out of hell. It's still a
little fuzzy but it doesn't matter. Uh, third point somebody pointed out that,
uh, the tensile strength necessary to hold the Ringworld together is on the
order of the, uh, tensile strength of an atomic nucleus. It's the super strong
force. Okay, I can live with that. I can postulate that I knew this grip would have
to be stronger than any normal material already Uh, fourth point. Some, uh, a
high school class in Florida got to work on the Ringworld and their conclusion
was that the Ringworld's worst problem is that all the topsoil would wind up in
the oceans in about 3,000 years. There are no earthquakes on the, uh, Ringworld,
no mountain building forces. Okay, uh, that's a tough one. Then I set up a spill
pipe system that runs the top, that runs the sea bottom muck from the sea
bottoms under the Ringworld and up over the edge of the rim wall that even
allows you some, uh, some mines, accumulation of, uh, useful metals. What else?
Checking in my head I find, uh, Frank Gasparic's suggestion that a machine
building culture on the Ringworld which reached our level wouldn't have any
petroleum products to use. They would wind up using alcohol of where we use
gasoline and, fine, I can live with that. As a matter of fact, the sludge from,
uh, making alcohol for automobiles, the sludge, can be used to make plastics. Maybe
plastic-like substances, maybe uh, the chemicals are just as elaborate as those,
as the residues from petroleum What else? Still checking in my head, I pick up on
other things. I can't use such as Dan Alderson's solar system which involves four
Ringworlds. He's got three Ringworlds about the size of mine rotating
orthogonally on frictionless bearings and the fourth Ringworld is, uh, about the
size of the orbit of Jupiter and inhabited by Mesklinites. Mesklinites derived
from a novel by Hal Clement, Mission of Gravity, and Mesklinites
require, uh, cold temperatures about those of the orbit of Jupiter as opposed to
Jupiter, which has an internal heat source, cold temperatures, and heavy gravity.
So there's, so his fourth Ringworld is the size of the orbit of Jupiter and
spinning like a bat out of hell. I had it figured out that if, if they spun that
Ringworld any faster, it would get nearer the speed of light and contract. Dan
says I've misunderstood relativity. It would not contract. Okay, I still haven't
figured out why not. Well, you obviously enjoy playing the game, as Hal Clement
calls it, between your own scientific knowledge and that of your readers and
peer.s Absolutely I incorporated everything that sounded good that I could use
in, in, elaborating the design of the Ringworld. What do you think about the
current ideas for space habitats That are proposed by Gerard O'Neill and others?
I think they are grandiose and I certainly wouldn't stop him, but the space
program seems to have fallen flat on its face at this point. We will have trouble
reaching the moon again. Getting back to the moon is as big a problem as we can
face I resent having to say that. But I believe it's true. Let's turn for a moment
to another of your novels. One written with Jerry Pournelle, The Mote in God's Eye.
How do you go about constructing an alien like the Moties? Were you influenced
by anyone in that area? The Moties was... no, not in that case. In that case, I
had the idea that I was following a progression with a protozoan, with an amoeba,
you get radial symmetry inside and out. Move up a goodly distance and you find
starfishes with radial symmetry on the outside, and bilateral symmetry on the
inside. Move up a little further, you find flat worms and worms of all stamps at
the level of bilateral symmetry inside and out. Go as far as a human, you find
bilateral symmetry on the outside and no symmetry, well, half symmetrical on the
inside. The lungs look symmetrical, the kidneys look symmetrical, the intestines
look like somebody dropped a plate of spaghetti I tried to move on to the next
step.
Bilaterally unsymmetrical on the outside and I got the original Moties, which
was the engineer for them. But I always design aliens for themselves I almost
never design an alien to match a story. The story... some story will eventually
include the alien The alien stands for himself I think that one of the
outstanding aspects of the Moties was their non-use of standardized machines.
They would create whatever replacement parts that they needed on the spot. Do you
recall what caused you to think along those lines for your alien society? I was
just playing along I was just playing with ideas at that point and that one
seemed like a fun one. It also seemed likely enough if you've got a critter with
not much intelligence except in the direction of tool making and tool altering,
then, uh, why not? The thing has to keep testing its ability or it will lose it.
It might as well be designing something every time it needs a specific machine.
The master can always stop it and have it producing it as if by assembly line, if
a master needs a lot of somethings fast. In Ringworld you developed something
called the Teela Brown gene. Humans bred to be lucky. Was that just a story gimmick
or were you extrapolating on the evolution of humanity? Oh... Partly that and
partly you've got to remember the time I was writing you I was damn sick and
tired of psychic powers showing up in stories I did not believe in psychic
powers at that time. I've been told they look pretty good now. But, uh, at the
time I really, I conceived the Teela Brown gene as being the ultimate psychic
power which you may interpret either as luck or as author control.
And, in that sense, it was something of a put on, except that I can believe
almost anything while I'm writing the story, and I am able to extrapolate. So if
Teela Brown is lucky certain things emerge, and if she's just a statistical fuk.
Then something else emerges. And that's that people will interpret anything that
happens to her as lucky, defending their preconceptions. What do you consider to
be your best work or your favorite work? No, I couldn't tell you that. There is
no way I can name a favorite work. The whole... My career is a progression for
one thing. I'd take any novel or any important short story even and out of that
progression and it wanders away in a different direction. So, I don't think I
have a favorite story, but I suppose I can name "Inconstant Moon" one, uh, which is
virtually the only strictly love story I've ever done and I suppose I could name
Lucifer's Hammer, which made me the most money. So, uh, a Mote in God's Eye may beat
that. I suppose I could name, uh, Oh, Man of Steel, Woman of Kleenex which has
gotten me the most laugh. I suppose everybody seems to have read it, and those
who haven't have heard about it at a cocktail party.
Or... What? Uh, Jerry Pournelle and I just recently wrote the last ten minutes for
a movie that had a good 90 minutes, followed by a bad last ten minutes. And the
last I've heard is they're not gonna make the movie which is a dirty shame. That
is, they're not gonna make the last ten minutes our way. They're gonna fiddle
with what they've got, and that's a really dirty shame. What they've got is
garbage. I really hope they'll use that last ten minutes, and if they do, I will
get considerable enjoyment out of that, and that'll be my favorite, you name it.
You mentioned your collaboration with Jerry Pournelle. Which do you prefer, writing
alone or with another author? I prefer variety.  I even prefer
variety in my collaborators. I just finished a novel with a Stephen Barnes And
we're starting another. A short one, and Jerry and I are starting another, almost
instantly, a novel about, uh well, we've designed an alien that could invade the
earth and also would want to. It's tough to get an alien whom you could believe
would want to invade the earth from another star considering the distances
involved and the energies involved and the penalties for failure and the lack of
the unlikelihood that it would do your home planet any good if you conquer
something that is six light years away. Anyway, we've designed one and we will be
writing a novel about that. When writing in collaboration is it difficult to
decide who writes what? It's hard sometimes, but it always resolves. The question
is who is most qualified to write a given scene that we have both decided needs
writing. Before we start, we have the novel all laid out. We know what's going in
virtually everywhere and if we don't, it feels like we do. And if we find out we
don't, we elaborate as we get to that section. Okay, the next question is who is
qualified to write a given scene? Sometimes it's obvious. If we're dealing with a
madman, he's mine. If we're dealing with military operations, it's Jerry's. Aliens
are generally mine. Politics is generally Jerry's. Knowledge of history generally
Jerry's. And a real evil son of a bitch Jerry usually creates him, and I usually
run with him afterwards. Because Jerry has a lot of textbooks on psychology and a
PhD in psychology for that matter, sorry, doctorate in psychology, and when he's
created a really evil son of a bitch, he just hates him too much to work with him.
I can usually do something. Horace Bury went that way and the rapist in
Lucifer's Hammer and a couple other characters in Inferno. I understand that both
you and Mr. Pournelle use computer word processors. How does that aid in your
writing? It makes first draft a little faster. But it makes corrections
enormously faster. You get a more polished novel when I'm using a word processor.
It's polishing is just like thinking into the machine almost. Uh, the word
processor behaves like a magic typewriter. It does everything you would want a
typewriter to do only it can't it can't erase whole blocks of print at a time
and then straighten up the page so it looks like you never made any corrections.
But a word processor can do just that and move blocks up and down the page, up
and down the manuscript. What do you think, Mr. Niven, is the future of science
fiction? Has fantasy begun taking over or is there a lot more hard science
fiction to come? Hard to say. For one thing, uh, writers in general don't take
orders worth a damn. The science fiction field is galloping off in all directions
just as it always has. And the reader will make the final decision in most cases.
What will be successful, it will depend on who buys what books. That's always
been true. I understand that some of your works were involved several years ago
with the animated Star Trek series. How did that come about? Oh, it went like
this. Uh, they were gonna start a Star Trek cartoon, and, uh, the lady who was
story editor got me involved I tried to give them a story that involved a mini
black hole and, uh, an outsider ship I had the idea that Star Trek had been
using men in rubber suits for so long That they wouldn't realize how much more
freedom they had with the animated version That turns out not to be the case
They had some very good aliens in there But, uh, that story turned out to be a
little over, over the heads of their intended audience So, I wound, uh, it, it
did incidentally wind up as, as the first version of the, uh, last part of a
story called The Borderlands Soul So, I eventually wound up meeting Gene
Roddenberry And he wound up suggesting, why don't I take a story called The Soft
Weapon And turn it into a, into a Star Trek version And I did that, and called
it The Slaver Weapon
And, fine, they, they eventually made a cartoon out of it They also sold the
right to turn that cartoon script into a story They sold that to Ballantyne I
got mildly upset The president of the CIFIL, who was Jerry Pournelle at the time,
got seriously upset And started making as many waves as he could And, what
eventually happened was that they sent me a dollar for, uh, a check for two
dollars and something something cents Somewhere between two and three dollars
And, Jerry, I don't know where the negotiations went But Jerry wound up saying,
okay, that defends the principle of the thing, uh, we'll ask for more next time
And that's, that for some years By, by then I had written to Ballantyne and
gotten a letter from Betty Ballantyne saying, Hey, we, we won't ever use it We
promise, we see you're upset We promise we won't ever do anything with this A
little later, the Ballantyne got out of the, uh, Ballantyne books business And,
and into the business of printing, uh, illustrated stuff And Judy Lindell Ray
wound up in charge And presently, presently, I'm being offered 2,000 bucks as
advisor to Alan Dean Foster Who will turn my script into a novel And, I said
fine, when I, what I really meant was acceptable A few months later, I've got a
letter from Judy Lind dropping the price to 500 and I blew my top I said, A, I
won't collaborate with, with, uh, you or Alan on anything of the kind And B, you
may not use anything from Known Space except what's in the script And that is
the way it happened Are there any plans for motion picture or television
adaptations of any of your works in the near future? Yes, there are Uh, I just
don't know how far they are going to go But there is, there is a group that owns
an option on, on Death by Ecstasy And a guy who owns an option on The Mode in
God's Eye And, let's see, I've got a friend trying to get a public broadcasting
system To make a TV version of Lucifer, of, uh, In Constant Moon Which would be
nice, all of which would be nice Are there any contemporary writers that you
particularly enjoy reading? Yes, a great many Ursula Le Guin, John Varley, Poul
Anderson, uh, Jerry Pournelle Uh,
how far do we go with this? I like the old ones and I like the new ones I like
about half of, uh, Ronald Ellison's stories Which is a better record than many
writers have I like a few of Phil Dixon's stories And I will probably buy the,
uh, Last of the Dorsi books by Gordie Dixon In fact, it's damn certain I will
read it I'll buy it if it doesn't come free I, I'm swamped in free books, you
know
Uh, I'm a Piers Anthony fan I don't know how numerous we Piers Anthony fans are
Uh, I like the puzzles in his books And his books are always jammed with puzzles
And new ways of thinking And so forth One last question, I don't suppose those
Piers and Puppeteers Ever snuck you the formula for the General Products hole,
did they? No, I don't have the formula for the General Products hole But I've,
I've reason to suspect that there are Puppeteers on Earth Uh, look at their
characteristics Uh, forget the shape, they must be masters of biology To hide
that peculiar three-legged, two-headed shape But consider their characteristics
They are cowards That is, they want everything utterly safe No corners on
anything Everything is soft surfaces around the puppeteer world Uh, they don't
even keep their world near a sun Regarding it as a runaway, uh, fusion reactor
Which of course it is So, uh, desperate regard for safety They, uh, plus an urge
to meddle in the lifestyles of other species Driving urge to, to meddle with,
with, uh, practically no restraints on the planet And the remains attached What
does that remind you of? It seems nearly certain to me that Ralph Nader is a
Pearson Spuppeteer
This is David Crews Daryl Lang And David Carson This has been the Science Fiction
Radio Show A presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association In
conjunction with KOCV-FM And Odessa College, Odessa, Texas